.TH RESGUARD 1 "March 2026" "resguard 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
resguard \- Linux system resource guard using systemd slices

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B resguard
[GLOBAL OPTIONS]
COMMAND [COMMAND OPTIONS]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B resguard
is a native Linux tool that manages system resource isolation through
systemd slices and cgroups v2.

The tool is agentless by default: it writes managed systemd configuration,
then relies on systemd for enforcement.

.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B init
Auto-detect hardware and generate a profile.

.TP
.B apply <profile>
Apply a profile by writing managed systemd drop-ins and slice units.
Supports dry-run and rollback-aware transactional behavior.

.TP
.B diff <profile>
Show pending managed file changes for a profile.

.TP
.B rollback [--last | --to <backup-id>]
Restore from backup state and remove paths created by apply.

.TP
.B status
Show best-effort status information (active profile, slice properties,
oomd state, PSI summary).

.TP
.B doctor
Run best-effort diagnostic checks for common setup/runtime issues.

.TP
.B metrics
Show pressure and memory/slice usage metrics from /proc and systemctl.

.TP
.B run --class <class> -- <cmd...>
Start a command in a class slice via systemd-run.
Supports --wait and optional --no-check override.

.TP
.B panic [--duration <Ns|Nm|Nh>]
Temporarily tighten user.slice runtime limits via systemctl set-property.

.TP
.B profile <subcommand>
Profile management namespace.
Implemented in v0.1: validate.
Other subcommands are CLI stubs.

.TP
.B desktop list [--filter <regex>] [--origin user|system|all]
List discovered desktop entries from XDG application directories.

.TP
.B desktop wrap <desktop_id> --class <class> [--force]
Create a user-local wrapper desktop entry that runs through:
.B resguard run --class <class> -- <original Exec>.
Mapping is written to
.I ~/.config/resguard/desktop-mapping.yml.

.TP
.B desktop unwrap <desktop_id> --class <class>
Remove a previously generated wrapper and its mapping entry.

.TP
.B desktop doctor
Validate wrapper files, PATH availability, and user slice presence.
Prints copy-paste fixes for apply/reload steps.

.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.B --format <table|json|yaml>
Output format. Default: table.

.TP
.B --root <path>
Root prefix for filesystem operations. Default: /.
Useful for integration testing without writing to host /etc or /var.

.TP
.B --config-dir <path>
Profile config directory. Default: /etc/resguard.

.TP
.B --state-dir <path>
State and backup directory. Default: /var/lib/resguard.

.TP
.B --verbose
Enable verbose output.

.TP
.B --quiet
Reduce output to errors.

.TP
.B --no-color
Disable colorized output.

.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
resguard init --dry-run
resguard init --name demo --out /etc/resguard/profiles/demo.yml --root /tmp/rg
resguard apply demo --dry-run --root /tmp/rg
resguard apply demo --root /tmp/rg
resguard rollback --last --root /tmp/rg
resguard run --class browsers -- firefox
resguard desktop list --origin all
resguard desktop wrap firefox.desktop --class browsers
resguard desktop doctor
resguard doctor
resguard metrics
.fi

.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/resguard/profiles/*.yml
Profile store (default; affected by --config-dir and --root).

.TP
.I /var/lib/resguard/state.json
Active state (default; affected by --state-dir and --root).

.TP
.I /var/lib/resguard/backups/<backup-id>/manifest.json
Backup manifest for rollback.

.TP
.I /etc/systemd/system/system.slice.d/50-resguard.conf
Managed system.slice drop-in.

.TP
.I /etc/systemd/system/user.slice.d/50-resguard.conf
Managed user.slice drop-in.

.TP
.I /etc/systemd/system/resguard-*.slice
Managed class slices (system manager).

.TP
.I /etc/systemd/user/resguard-*.slice
Managed class slices (user manager).

.TP
.I ~/.local/share/applications/*.resguard-*.desktop
Managed desktop wrappers.

.TP
.I ~/.config/resguard/desktop-mapping.yml
Desktop wrapper mapping store.

.SH SECURITY
resguard modifies resource-related systemd configuration.
For safety:

.IP \[bu] 2
Use dry-run before apply in production.
.IP \[bu] 2
Prefer explicit profile validation.
.IP \[bu] 2
Use rollback on failed or undesired applies.
.IP \[bu] 2
Avoid bypass options (for example run --no-check) unless required.

See also: SECURITY.md and docs/safety.md.
